Tracking GitHub Issues and Pull Requests with Directus Automate (#278)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: Build A GitHub Repository Tracker With Directus Flow/github_repository_tracker.md

---

> title: "Build A GitHub Repository Tracker With Directus Flow"
> description: "Learn how to keep track of changes in a GitHub repository in your Directus project."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Tracking GitHub Issues and Pull Requests with Directus Automate"
description: "Learn how to use Directus Automate to keep track of new issues, pull requests, and comments in a GitHub repository."
```

author:
  name: "Erinle Samuel"
  avatar_file_name: "profile-picture.jpg"
---

> ## Introduction
> 
> Keeping tabs on repository activities like issues, comments and pull requests helps to ensure timely responses and manage workflow effectively during project development.
> In this tutorial, you will learn how to track changes in a GitHub repository within your Directus project using Directus flow. By the end of this article, you will have created a repository tracker that sends alerts via email and in-app notifications.
> 
> ## Before You Start
> 
> You will need:
> 
> - A Directus project - Create a project by following this [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart.html)
> 
> - [A GitHub Account](https://github.com/signup)
> 
> :::warning
> 
> To follow this tutorial, ensure you have admin access to the GitHub repository you wish to track.
> 
> Note that you won't be able to follow along with this tutorial if your Directus project is running on localhost. GitHub cannot send data to [http://localhost:8055](http://localhost:8055) because it's not a remote location.
> 
> For ease, use [Directus Cloud](https://directus.cloud/) or deploy your project to a remote server; you can refer to [this article](https://docs.directus.io/blog/deploying-directus-to-aws-ec2-with-docker.html) for guidance.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to track events, such as new issues and pull requests, in a GitHub repository using Directus Automate. By the end of this article, you will have created a repository tracker that sends alerts via email and in-app notifications.

## Before You Start

You will need:

- A Directus project - Create a project by following this [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart.html). Your project will need to be accessible via a public URL so you'll need to host it or use a tunnel to your local instance.
- [A GitHub Account](https://github.com/signup) and admin access to the GitHub repo you want to track.
```

> ## Creating The Flow
> 
> In your Directus project, navigate to **Settings** => **Flows** and create a Flow. In the Trigger Setup section, select **Webhook Trigger** so we can listen to events from GitHub. Ensure the Webhook Trigger is set to use the `POST` method with Asynchronous mode enabled. Save the Flow and copy the Trigger URL.
> 
> ![A screenshot of the Flow demonstrating where to find the Trigger URL](flow_setup.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a New Flow

In your Directus project, navigate to **Settings -> Flows** and create a Flow. In the Trigger Setup section, select **Webhook Trigger** so we can receive events from GitHub. Ensure the Webhook Trigger is set to use the `POST` method with Asynchronous mode enabled. Save the Flow and copy the Trigger URL.

![A screenshot of the Flow demonstrating where to find the Trigger URL](flow_setup.png)
```

> ## Setting Up a Webhook on GitHub
> 
> GitHub allows developers to create webhooks for both repositories and organizations using the same process. To create a webhook, navigate to the repository or organization you want to track. Go to the **Settings** tab and select **Webhooks** from the menu.
> 
> ![A screenshot of GitHub setting => Webhooks page](github_webhook_page.png)
> 
> Click on the **Add Webhook** button. Next, paste the Trigger URL from Directus flow into the `Payload URL` field and change the content type to `application/json`.
> 
> Select the event(s) that should trigger the webhook. For this tutorial, choose the `Let me select individual events` option and toggle these events:
> 
> - Issues,
> - Issue comments, and
> - Pull requests.
> 
> Save your settings by clicking the **Add Webhook** button. GitHub will send a ping payload to your Directus project. Confirm the webhook is successful by checking the Activity Logs section.
> 
> ![A screenshot of Activity Logs section on](github_ping.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setting Up a Webhook on GitHub

GitHub allows developers to create webhooks for both repositories and organizations. A webhook is a web request to an external URL (in this case, Directus) that will be immediately triggered when an event happens such as a new issue being opened in a repository. 

To create a webhook, navigate to the repository or organization you want to track. Go to the **Settings** tab and select **Webhooks** from the menu.

Click on the **Add Webhook** button. Next, paste the Trigger URL from Directus flow into the `Payload URL` field and change the content type to `application/json`.

Select the events that should trigger the webhook. For this tutorial, choose the `Let me select individual events` option and toggle these events:

- Issues
- Issue comments
- Pull requests

Save your settings by clicking the **Add Webhook** button. GitHub will send a ping payload to your Directus project. Confirm the webhook is successful by checking the Activity Logs section in your Flow.

![A screenshot of Activity Logs section in the Flow editor](github_ping.png)
```

A whole bunch of small changes here:
1. Explain what webhooks are
2. Link them back to the project
3. Remove the image of GitHub as it doesn't serve much value

## Creating the Alert System

> The final step is to set up an alert system to notify you or others on the project when any of the selected events occur. Depending on your preference, you can use email or in-app notifications available in Directus flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step is to set up an alert system to notify you or others on the project when any of the selected events occur. Depending on your preference, you can use email or in-app notifications available as operations in Flows.
```

Since there are three different events, creating a one-size-fits-all notification template won't be ideal. Instead, we can generate a separate notification template for each event by setting up **Condition** operations to check if the trigger event is an issue, issue comment, or pull request.

### Setting Up Condition Operations

Create a condition operation with the following rules:

```json
{
  "$trigger": {
    "headers": {
      "x-github-event": {
        "_eq": "issues"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Add another condition in the [failure path](https://docs.directus.io/app/flows.html) of the first condition to check if the event is an issue comment. The setup is the same as the above condition, with the change being `"_eq": "issue_comment"`. You should see something like this:

![Screenshot showing the flow with the two conditions we have created](conditionals_in_flow.png)

### Generate Notification Template

The next step is to create a custom notification template for each event, generating dynamic content specific to each one.

> - For Issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Issues:
```

```md
Hi name,

I want to bring to your attention an issue that has been {{$trigger.body.action}} on the GitHub repository.

| Issue title         | {{$trigger.body.issue.title}}         |
| :------------------ | :------------------------------------ |
| Description         | {{$trigger.body.issue.body}}          |
| Author's name       | {{$trigger.body.issue.user.login}}    |
| Author's GitHub URL | {{$trigger.body.issue.user.html_url}} |

> You can view the full issue and its details by following this link: [Link to the issue]($trigger.body.issue.html_url).

Reviewer: Make sure to test these - I think this needs the {{}} to be valid

Thank you!
```

> - For Issue comments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For issue comments:
```

```md
Hi name,

Issue #{{$trigger.body.issue.number}} has a new comment by [{{$trigger.body.comment.user.login}}]({{$trigger.body.comment.user.html_url}})

| Issue title | {{$trigger.body.issue.title}}  |
| :---------- | :----------------------------- |
| Comment     | {{$trigger.body.comment.body}} |

You can view the issue and join the conversation: [Link to the issue]($trigger.body.issue.html_url).

Thank you!
```

> - For pull requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For pull requests:
```

```md

> Hi Sam,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hi name,
```
